README.md, before:

# README

## Overview
This project focuses on the analysis and visualization of medulloblastoma data using Variational Autoencoders (VAE). The pipeline includes data preprocessing, classification, clustering, and visualization steps.

## Table of Contents
- [Installation](#installation)
- [Usage](#usage)
- [Reproducing Results](#reproducing-results)
- [Contributing](#contributing)
- [License](#license)

## Installation
To set up the project, you need to create a conda environment using the provided `environment.yml` file. 

*Note: using mamba instead of conda is recommended for faster environment creation.*

Follow these steps:

1. Clone the repository:
    ```bash
    git clone https://github.com/gprolcastelo/scratchmedulloblastoma.git
    cd scratchmedulloblastoma
    ```

2. Create the conda environment:
    ```bash
    conda env create -f environment.yml
    ```

3. Activate the environment:
    ```bash
    conda activate medulloblastoma
    ```

## Usage
After setting up the environment, you can start using the scripts provided in the repository. The main pipeline script is `pipeline.sh`, which runs the entire analysis pipeline.

After following the steps from the [Installation](#installation) sectionn, just execute `pipeline.sh`:

	```bash
    bash pipeline.sh
	```

Finally, the Jupyter Notebook `putting_results_together.ipynb` contains the code for ad-hoc processes that were not included in the `src` folder codes.

## Reproducing Results
To reproduce the results, follow these steps:

1. Ensure that the conda environment is activated:
    ```bash
    conda activate medulloblastoma
    ```

2. Run the pipeline script:
    ```bash
    bash pipeline.sh
    ```

This script will execute all the necessary steps, including data preprocessing, classification, clustering, and visualization, and save the results to the `data` and `reports` subdirectories.

> **High Performance Computing (HPC) is highly recommended to run the pipeline**, as it requires significant computational resources, especially when training the VAE model and running the SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP) algorithm. 

Take into account that the scripts will generate over 200 GB of data.

## Contributing
Contributions generally not expected. However, if you have any suggestions or improvements, feel free to reach out in the issues section. 
On the other hand, this is an open-source, open-science project, and so you are encouraged to reproduce our results.
Feel free to clone or fork the repository.

## License
This project is licensed under the Apache 2.0 License. See the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for more details.

Commit message:

commented saving SHAP values to csv

README.md, after:

# README

## Overview
This project focuses on the analysis and visualization of medulloblastoma data using Variational Autoencoders (VAE). The pipeline includes data preprocessing, classification, clustering, and visualization steps.

## Table of Contents
- [Installation](#installation)
- [Usage](#usage)
- [Reproducing Results](#reproducing-results)
- [Contributing](#contributing)
- [License](#license)

## Installation
To set up the project, you need to create a conda environment using the provided `environment.yml` file. 

*Note: using mamba instead of conda is recommended for faster environment creation.*

Follow these steps:

1. Clone the repository:
    ```bash
    git clone https://github.com/gprolcastelo/scratchmedulloblastoma.git
    cd scratchmedulloblastoma
    ```

2. Create the conda environment:
    ```bash
    conda env create -f environment.yml
    ```

3. Activate the environment:
    ```bash
    conda activate medulloblastoma
    ```

## Usage
After setting up the environment, you can start using the scripts provided in the repository. The main pipeline script is `pipeline.sh`, which runs the entire analysis pipeline.

After following the steps from the [Installation](#installation) sectionn, just execute `pipeline.sh`:

	```bash
    bash pipeline.sh
	```

Finally, the Jupyter Notebook `putting_results_together.ipynb` contains the code for ad-hoc processes that were not included in the `src` folder codes.

## Reproducing Results
To reproduce the results, follow these steps:

1. Ensure that the conda environment is activated:
    ```bash
    conda activate medulloblastoma
    ```

2. Run the pipeline script:
    ```bash
    bash pipeline.sh
    ```

This script will execute all the necessary steps, including data preprocessing, classification, clustering, and visualization, and save the results to the `data` and `reports` subdirectories.

> **High Performance Computing (HPC) is highly recommended to run the pipeline**, as it requires significant computational resources, especially when training the VAE model and running the SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP) algorithm. 

For example, running the `src/classification_shap.py` on the preprocessed data took about 18 hours on 112 cores.

## Contributing
Contributions generally not expected. However, if you have any suggestions or improvements, feel free to reach out in the issues section. 
On the other hand, this is an open-source, open-science project, and so you are encouraged to reproduce our results.
Feel free to clone or fork the repository.

## License
This project is licensed under the Apache 2.0 License. See the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for more details.
